crying there, away in the night.  I was behind the door, and I was
mighty sorry for you, Miss Mary Jane.”

It made my eyes water a little to remember her crying there all by
herself in the night, and them devils laying there right under her own
roof, shaming her and robbing her; and when I folded it up and give it
to her I see the water come into her eyes, too; and she shook me by the
hand, hard, and says:

“_Good_-bye.  I’m going to do everything just as you’ve told me; and if
I don’t ever see you again, I sha’n’t ever forget you and I’ll think of
you a many and a many a time, and I’ll _pray_ for you, too!”--and she was
gone.

Pray for me!  I reckoned if she knowed me she’d take a job that was more
nearer her size.  But I bet she done it, just the same--she was just that
kind.  She had the grit to pray for Judus if she took the notion--there
warn’t no back-down to her, I judge.  You may say what you want to, but
in my opinion she had more sand in her than any girl I ever see; in
my opinion she was just full of sand.  It sounds like flattery, but it
ain’t no flattery.  And when it comes to beauty--and goodness, too--she
lays over them all.  I hain’t ever seen her since that time that I see
her go out of that door; no, I hain’t ever seen her since, but I reckon
I’ve thought of her a many and a many a million times, and of her saying
she would pray for me; and if ever I’d a thought it would do any good
for me to pray for _her_, blamed if I wouldn’t a done it or bust.

Well, Mary Jane she lit out the back way, I reckon; because nobody see
her go.  When I struck Susan and the hare-lip, I says:

“What’s the name of them people over on t’other side of the river that
you all goes to see sometimes?”

They says:

“There’s several; but it’s the Proctors, mainly.”

“That’s the name,” I says; “I most forgot it.  Well, Miss Mary Jane she
told me to tell you she’s gone over there in a dreadful hurry--one of
them’s sick.”

“Which one?”

“I don’t know; leastways, I kinder forget; but I thinks it’s--”

“Sakes alive, I hope it ain’t _Hanner_?”

“I’m sorry to say it,” I says, “but Hanner’s the very one.”

“My goodness, and she so well only last week!  Is she took bad?”

“It ain’t no name for it.  They set up with her all night, Miss Mary
Jane said, and they don’t think she’ll last many hours.”

“Only think of that, now!  What’s the matter with her?”

I couldn’t think of anything reasonable, right off that way, so I says:

“Mumps.”

“Mumps your granny!  They don’t set up with people that’s got the
mumps.”

“They don’t, don’t they?  You better bet they do with _these_ mumps.
 These mumps is different.  It’s a new kind, Miss Mary Jane said.”

“How’s it a new kind?”

“Because it’s mixed up with other things.”

“What other things?”

“Well, measles, and whooping-cough, and erysiplas, and consumption, and
yaller janders, and brain-fever, and I don’t know what all.”

“My land!  And they call it the _mumps_?”

“That’s what Miss Mary Jane said.”

“Well, what in the nation do they call it the _mumps_ for?”

“Why, because it _is_ the mumps.  That’s what it starts with.”

“Well, ther’ ain’t no sense in it.  A body might stump his toe, and take
pison, and fall down the well, and break his neck, and bust his brains
out, and somebody come along and ask what killed him, and some numskull
up and say, ‘Why, he stumped his _toe_.’  Would ther’ be any sense
in that? _No_.  And ther’ ain’t no sense in _this_, nuther.  Is it
ketching?”

“Is it _ketching_?  Why, how you talk.  Is a _harrow_ catching--in the
dark? If you don’t hitch on to one tooth, you’re bound to on another,
ain’t you? And you can’t get away with that tooth without fetching the
whole harrow along, can you?  Well, these kind of mumps is a kind of a
harrow, as you may say--and it ain’t no slouch of a harrow, nuther, you
come to get it hitched on good.”

“Well, it’s awful, I think,” says the hare-lip.  “I’ll go to Uncle
Harvey and--”

“Oh, yes,” I says, “I _would_.  Of _course_ I would.  I wouldn’t lose no
time.”

“Well, why wouldn’t you?”

“Just look at it a minute, and maybe you can see.  Hain’t your uncles
obleegd to get along home to England as fast as they can?  And do you
reckon they’d be mean enough to go off and leave you to go all that
journey by yourselves?  _you_ know they’ll wait for you.  So fur, so
good. Your uncle Harvey’s a preacher, ain’t he?  Very well, then; is a
_preacher_ going to deceive a steamboat clerk? is he going to deceive
a _ship clerk?_--so as to get them to let Miss Mary Jane go aboard?  Now
_you_ know he ain’t.  What _will_ he do, then?  Why, he’ll say, ‘It’s a
great pity, but my church matters has got to get along the best way they
can; for my niece has been exposed to the dreadful pluribus-unum mumps,
and so it’s my bounden duty to set down here and wait the three months
it takes to show on her if she’s got it.’  But never mind, if you think
it’s best to tell your uncle Harvey--”

“Shucks, and stay fooling around here when we could all be having good
times in England whilst we was waiting to find out whether Mary Jane’s
got it or not?  Why, you talk like a muggins.”

“Well, anyway, maybe you’d better tell some of the neighbors.”

“Listen at that, now.  You do beat all for natural stupidness.  Can’t
you _see_ that _they’d_ go and tell?  Ther’ ain’t no way but just to not
tell anybody at _all_.”

“Well, maybe you’re right--yes, I judge you _are_ right.”

“But I reckon we ought to tell Uncle Harvey she’s gone out a while,
anyway, so he won’t be uneasy about her?”

“Yes, Miss Mary Jane she wanted you to do that.  She says, ‘Tell them to
give Uncle Harvey and William my love and a kiss, and say I’ve run over
the river to see Mr.’--Mr.--what _is_ the name of that rich family your
uncle Peter used to think so much of?--I mean the one that--”

“Why, you must mean the Apthorps, ain’t it?”

“Of course; bother them kind of names, a body can’t ever seem to
remember them, half the time, somehow.  Yes, she said, say she has run
over for to ask the Apthorps to be sure and come to the auction and buy
this house, because she allowed her uncle Peter would ruther they had
it than anybody else; and she’s going to stick to them till they say
they’ll come, and then, if she ain’t too tired, she’s coming home; and
if she is, she’ll be home in the morning anyway.  She said, don’t say
nothing about the Proctors, but only about the Apthorps--which ‘ll be
perfectly true, because she is going there to speak about their buying
the house; I know it, because she told me so herself.”

“All right,” they said, and cleared out to lay for their uncles, and
give them the love and the kisses, and tell them the message.

Everything was all right now.  The girls wouldn’t say nothing because
they wanted to go to England; and the king and the duke would ruther
Mary Jane was off working for the auction than around in reach of
Doctor Robinson.  I felt very good; I judged I had done it pretty neat--I
reckoned Tom Sawyer couldn’t a done it no neater himself.  Of course he
would a throwed more style into it, but I can’t do that very handy, not
being brung up to it.

Well, they held the auction in the public square, along towards the end
of the afternoon, and it strung along, and strung along, and the old man
he was on hand and looking his level pisonest, up there longside of the
auctioneer, and chipping in a little Scripture now and then, or a little
goody-goody saying of some kind, and the duke he was around goo-gooing
for sympathy all he knowed how, and just spreading himself generly.

But by and by the thing dragged through, and everything was
sold--everything but a little old trifling lot in the graveyard.  So
they’d got to work that off--I never see such a girafft as the king was
for wanting to swallow _everything_.  Well, whilst they was at it a
steamboat landed, and in about two minutes up comes a crowd a-whooping
and yelling and laughing and carrying on, and singing out:

“_Here’s_ your opposition line! here’s your two sets o’ heirs to old
Peter Wilks--and you pays your money and you takes your choice!”




CHAPTER XXIX.

THEY was fetching a very nice-looking old gentleman along, and a
nice-looking younger one, with his right arm in a sling.  And, my souls,
how the people yelled and laughed, and kept it up.  But I didn’t see no
joke about it, and I judged it would strain the duke and the king some
to see any.  I reckoned they’d turn pale.  But no, nary a pale did
_they_ turn. The duke he never let on he suspicioned what was up, but
just went a goo-gooing around, happy and satisfied, like a jug that’s
googling out buttermilk; and as for the king, he just gazed and gazed
down sorrowful on them new-comers like it give him the stomach-ache in
his very heart to think there could be such frauds and rascals in the
world.  Oh, he done it admirable.  Lots of the principal people
gethered around the king, to let him see they was on his side.  That old
gentleman that had just come looked all puzzled to death.  Pretty
soon he begun to speak, and I see straight off he pronounced _like_ an
Englishman--not the king’s way, though the king’s _was_ pretty good for
an imitation.  I can’t give the old gent’s words, nor I can’t imitate
him; but he turned around to the crowd, and says, about like this:

“This is a surprise to me which I wasn’t looking for; and I’ll
acknowledge, candid and frank, I ain’t very well fixed to meet it and
answer it; for my brother and me has had misfortunes; he’s broke his
arm, and our baggage got put off at a town above here last night in the
night by a mistake.  I am Peter Wilks’ brother Harvey, and this is his
brother William, which can’t hear nor speak--and can’t even make signs to
amount to much, now’t he’s only got one hand to work them with.  We are
who we say we are; and in a day or two, when I get the baggage, I can
prove it. But up till then I won’t say nothing more, but go to the hotel
and wait.”

So him and the new dummy started off; and the king he laughs, and
blethers out:

“Broke his arm--_very_ likely, _ain’t_ it?--and very convenient, too,
for a fraud that’s got to make signs, and ain’t learnt how.  Lost
their baggage! That’s _mighty_ good!--and mighty ingenious--under the
_circumstances_!”

So he laughed again; and so did everybody else, except three or four,
or maybe half a dozen.  One of these was that doctor; another one was
a sharp-looking gentleman, with a carpet-bag of the old-fashioned kind
made out of carpet-stuff, that had just come off of the steamboat and
was talking to him in a low voice, and glancing towards the king now and
then and nodding their heads--it was Levi Bell, the lawyer that was gone
up to Louisville; and another one was a big rough husky that come along
and listened to all the old gentleman said, and was listening to the
king now. And when the king got done this husky up and says:

“Say, looky here; if you are Harvey Wilks, when’d you come to this
town?”

“The day before the funeral, friend,” says the king.

“But what time o’ day?”

“In the evenin’--‘bout an hour er two before sundown.”

“_How’d_ you come?”

“I come down on the Susan Powell from Cincinnati.”

“Well, then, how’d you come to be up at the Pint in the _mornin_’--in a
canoe?”

“I warn’t up at the Pint in the mornin’.”

“It’s a lie.”

Several of them jumped for him and begged him not to talk that way to an
old man and a preacher.

“Preacher be hanged, he’s a fraud and a liar.  He was up at the Pint
that mornin’.  I live up there, don’t I?  Well, I was up there, and
he was up there.  I see him there.  He come in a canoe, along with Tim
Collins and a boy.”

The doctor he up and says:

“Would you know the boy again if you was to see him, Hines?”

“I reckon I would, but I don’t know.  Why, yonder he is, now.  I know
him perfectly easy.”

It was me he pointed at.  The doctor says:

“Neighbors, I don’t know whether the new couple is frauds or not; but if
_these_ two ain’t frauds, I am an idiot, that’s all.  I think it’s our
duty to see that they don’t get away from here till we’ve looked into
this thing. Come along, Hines; come along, the rest of you.  We’ll take
these fellows to the tavern and affront them with t’other couple, and I
reckon we’ll find out _something_ before we get through.”

It was nuts for the crowd, though maybe not for the king’s friends; so
we all started.  It was about sundown.  The doctor he led me along by
the hand, and was plenty kind enough, but he never let go my hand.

We all got in a big room in the hotel, and lit up some candles, and
fetched in the new couple.  First, the doctor says:

“I don’t wish to be too hard on these two men, but I think they’re
frauds, and they may have complices that we don’t know nothing about.
 If they have, won’t the complices get away with that bag of gold Peter
Wilks left?  It ain’t unlikely.  If these men ain’t frauds, they won’t
object to sending for that money and letting us keep it till they prove
they’re all right--ain’t that so?”

Everybody agreed to that.  So I judged they had our gang in a pretty
tight place right at the outstart.  But the king he only looked
sorrowful, and says:

“Gentlemen, I wish the money was there, for I ain’t got no disposition
to throw anything in the way of a fair, open, out-and-out investigation
o’ this misable business; but, alas, the money ain’t there; you k’n send
and see, if you want to.”

“Where is it, then?”

“Well, when my niece give it to me to keep for her I took and hid it
inside o’ the straw tick o’ my bed, not wishin’ to bank it for the few
days we’d be here, and considerin’ the bed a safe place, we not bein’
used to niggers, and suppos’n’ ‘em honest, like servants in England.
 The niggers stole it the very next mornin’ after I had went down
stairs; and when I sold ‘em I hadn’t missed the money yit, so they got
clean away with it.  My servant here k’n tell you ‘bout it, gentlemen.”

The doctor and several said “Shucks!” and I see nobody didn’t altogether
believe him.  One man asked me if I see the niggers steal it.  I said
no, but I see them sneaking out of the room and hustling away, and I
never thought nothing, only I reckoned they was afraid they had waked up
my master and was trying to get away before he made trouble with them.
 That was all they asked me.  Then the doctor whirls on me and says:

“Are _you_ English, too?”

I says yes; and him and some others laughed, and said, “Stuff!”

Well, then they sailed in on the general investigation, and there we had
it, up and down, hour in, hour out, and nobody never said a word about
supper, nor ever seemed to think about it--and so they kept it up, and
kept it up; and it _was_ the worst mixed-up thing you ever see.  They
made the king tell his yarn, and they made the old gentleman tell his’n;
and anybody but a lot of prejudiced chuckleheads would a _seen_ that the
old gentleman was spinning truth and t’other one lies.  And by and by
they had me up to tell what I knowed.  The king he give me a left-handed
look out of the corner of his eye, and so I knowed enough to talk on the
right side.  I begun to tell about Sheffield, and how we lived there,
and all about the English Wilkses, and so on; but I didn’t get pretty
fur till the doctor begun to laugh; and Levi Bell, the lawyer, says:

“Set down, my boy; I wouldn’t strain myself if I was you.  I reckon
you ain’t used to lying, it don’t seem to come handy; what you want is
practice.  You do it pretty awkward.”

I didn’t care nothing for the compliment, but I was glad to be let off,
anyway.

The doctor he started to say something, and turns and says:

“If you’d been in town at first, Levi Bell--” The king broke in and
reached out his hand, and says:

“Why, is this my poor dead brother’s old friend that he’s wrote so often
about?”

The lawyer and him shook hands, and the lawyer smiled and looked
pleased, and they talked right along awhile, and then got to one side
and talked low; and at last the lawyer speaks up and says:

“That ‘ll fix it.  I’ll take the order and send it, along with your
brother’s, and then they’ll know it’s all right.”

So they got some paper and a pen, and the king he set down and twisted
his head to one side, and chawed his tongue, and scrawled off something;
and then they give the pen to the duke--and then for the first time the
duke looked sick.  But he took the pen and wrote.  So then the lawyer
turns to the new old gentleman and says:

“You and your brother please write a line or two and sign your names.”

The old gentleman wrote, but nobody couldn’t read it.  The lawyer looked
powerful astonished, and says:

“Well, it beats _me_”--and snaked a lot of old letters out of his pocket,
and examined them, and then examined the old man’s writing, and then
_them_ again; and then says:  “These old letters is from Harvey Wilks;
and here’s _these_ two handwritings, and anybody can see they didn’t
write them” (the king and the duke looked sold and foolish, I tell
you, to see how the lawyer had took them in), “and here’s _this_ old
gentleman’s hand writing, and anybody can tell, easy enough, _he_ didn’t
write them--fact is, the scratches he makes ain’t properly _writing_ at
all.  Now, here’s some letters from--”

The new old gentleman says:

“If you please, let me explain.  Nobody can read my hand but my brother
there--so he copies for me.  It’s _his_ hand you’ve got there, not mine.”

“_Well_!” says the lawyer, “this _is_ a state of things.  I’ve got some
of William’s letters, too; so if you’ll get him to write a line or so we
can com--”

“He _can’t_ write with his left hand,” says the old gentleman.  “If he
could use his right hand, you would see that he wrote his own letters
and mine too.  Look at both, please--they’re by the same hand.”

The lawyer done it, and says:

“I believe it’s so--and if it ain’t so, there’s a heap stronger
resemblance than I’d noticed before, anyway.  Well, well, well!  I
thought we was right on the track of a solution, but it’s gone to grass,
partly.  But anyway, one thing is proved--_these_ two ain’t either of ‘em
Wilkses”--and he wagged his head towards the king and the duke.

Well, what do you think?  That muleheaded old fool wouldn’t give in
_then_! Indeed he wouldn’t.  Said it warn’t no fair test.  Said his
brother William was the cussedest joker in the world, and hadn’t tried
to write--_he_ see William was going to play one of his jokes the minute
he put the pen to paper.  And so he warmed up and went warbling and
warbling right along till he was actuly beginning to believe what he was
saying _himself_; but pretty soon the new gentleman broke in, and says:

“I’ve thought of something.  Is there anybody here that helped to lay
out my br--helped to lay out the late Peter Wilks for burying?”

“Yes,” says somebody, “me and Ab Turner done it.  We’re both here.”

Then the old man turns towards the king, and says:

“Perhaps this gentleman can tell me what was tattooed on his breast?”

Blamed if the king didn’t have to brace up mighty quick, or he’d a
squshed down like a bluff bank that the river has cut under, it took
him so sudden; and, mind you, it was a thing that was calculated to make
most _anybody_ sqush to get fetched such a solid one as that without any
notice, because how was _he_ going to know what was tattooed on the man?
 He whitened a little; he couldn’t help it; and it was mighty still in
there, and everybody bending a little forwards and gazing at him.  Says
I to myself, _now_ he’ll throw up the sponge--there ain’t no more use.
 Well, did he?  A body can’t hardly believe it, but he didn’t.  I reckon
he thought he’d keep the thing up till he tired them people out, so
they’d thin out, and him and the duke could break loose and get away.
 Anyway, he set there, and pretty soon he begun to smile, and says:

“Mf!  It’s a _very_ tough question, _ain’t_ it!  _yes_, sir, I k’n
tell you what’s tattooed on his breast.  It’s jest a small, thin, blue
arrow--that’s what it is; and if you don’t look clost, you can’t see it.
 _now_ what do you say--hey?”

Well, I never see anything like that old blister for clean out-and-out
cheek.

The new old gentleman turns brisk towards Ab Turner and his pard, and
his eye lights up like he judged he’d got the king _this_ time, and
says:

“There--you’ve heard what he said!  Was there any such mark on Peter
Wilks’ breast?”

Both of them spoke up and says:

“We didn’t see no such mark.”

“Good!” says the old gentleman.  “Now, what you _did_ see on his breast
was a small dim P, and a B (which is an initial he dropped when he was
young), and a W, with dashes between them, so:  P--B--W”--and he marked
them that way on a piece of paper.  “Come, ain’t that what you saw?”

Both of them spoke up again, and says:

“No, we _didn’t_.  We never seen any marks at all.”

Well, everybody _was_ in a state of mind now, and they sings out:

“The whole _bilin_’ of ‘m ‘s frauds!  Le’s duck ‘em! le’s drown ‘em!
le’s ride ‘em on a rail!” and everybody was whooping at once, and there
was a rattling powwow.  But the lawyer he jumps on the table and yells,
and says:

“Gentlemen--gentle_men!_  Hear me just a word--just a _single_ word--if you
_please_!  There’s one way yet--let’s go and dig up the corpse and look.”

That took them.

“Hooray!” they all shouted, and was starting right off; but the lawyer
and the doctor sung out:

“Hold on, hold on!  Collar all these four men and the boy, and fetch
_them_ along, too!”

“We’ll do it!” they all shouted; “and if we don’t find them marks we’ll
lynch the whole gang!”

I _was_ scared, now, I tell you.  But there warn’t no getting away, you
know. They gripped us all, and marched us right along, straight for the
graveyard, which was a mile and a half down the river, and the whole
town at our heels, for we made noise enough, and it was only nine in the
evening.

As we went by our house I wished I hadn’t sent Mary Jane out of town;
because now if I could tip her the wink she’d light out and save me, and
blow on our dead-beats.

Well, we swarmed along down the river road, just carrying on like
wildcats; and to make it more scary the sky was darking up, and the
lightning beginning to wink and flitter, and the wind to shiver amongst
the leaves. This was the most awful trouble and most dangersome I ever
was in; and I was kinder stunned; everything was going so different from
what I had allowed for; stead of being fixed so I could take my own time
if I wanted to, and see all the fun, and have Mary Jane at my back to
save me and set me free when the close-fit come, here was nothing in the
