a-loafing around town to put in the time and wait.  A man up and offered
me ten cents to help him pull a skiff over the river and back to fetch
a sheep, and so I went along; but when we was dragging him to the boat,
and the man left me a-holt of the rope and went behind him to shove him
along, he was too strong for me and jerked loose and run, and we after
him.  We didn’t have no dog, and so we had to chase him all over the
country till we tired him out.  We never got him till dark; then we
fetched him over, and I started down for the raft.  When I got there and
see it was gone, I says to myself, ‘They’ve got into trouble and had to
leave; and they’ve took my nigger, which is the only nigger I’ve got in
the world, and now I’m in a strange country, and ain’t got no property
no more, nor nothing, and no way to make my living;’ so I set down and
cried.  I slept in the woods all night.  But what _did_ become of the
raft, then?--and Jim--poor Jim!”

“Blamed if I know--that is, what’s become of the raft.  That old fool had
made a trade and got forty dollars, and when we found him in the doggery
the loafers had matched half-dollars with him and got every cent but
what he’d spent for whisky; and when I got him home late last night and
found the raft gone, we said, ‘That little rascal has stole our raft and
shook us, and run off down the river.’”

“I wouldn’t shake my _nigger_, would I?--the only nigger I had in the
world, and the only property.”

“We never thought of that.  Fact is, I reckon we’d come to consider him
_our_ nigger; yes, we did consider him so--goodness knows we had trouble
enough for him.  So when we see the raft was gone and we flat broke,
there warn’t anything for it but to try the Royal Nonesuch another
shake. And I’ve pegged along ever since, dry as a powder-horn.  Where’s
that ten cents? Give it here.”

I had considerable money, so I give him ten cents, but begged him to
spend it for something to eat, and give me some, because it was all the
money I had, and I hadn’t had nothing to eat since yesterday.  He never
said nothing.  The next minute he whirls on me and says:

“Do you reckon that nigger would blow on us?  We’d skin him if he done
that!”

“How can he blow?  Hain’t he run off?”

“No!  That old fool sold him, and never divided with me, and the money’s
gone.”

“_Sold_ him?”  I says, and begun to cry; “why, he was _my_ nigger, and
that was my money.  Where is he?--I want my nigger.”

“Well, you can’t _get_ your nigger, that’s all--so dry up your
blubbering. Looky here--do you think _you’d_ venture to blow on us?
 Blamed if I think I’d trust you.  Why, if you _was_ to blow on us--”

He stopped, but I never see the duke look so ugly out of his eyes
before. I went on a-whimpering, and says:

“I don’t want to blow on nobody; and I ain’t got no time to blow, nohow.
I got to turn out and find my nigger.”

He looked kinder bothered, and stood there with his bills fluttering on
his arm, thinking, and wrinkling up his forehead.  At last he says:

“I’ll tell you something.  We got to be here three days.  If you’ll
promise you won’t blow, and won’t let the nigger blow, I’ll tell you
where to find him.”

So I promised, and he says:

“A farmer by the name of Silas Ph--” and then he stopped.  You see, he
started to tell me the truth; but when he stopped that way, and begun to
study and think again, I reckoned he was changing his mind.  And so he
was. He wouldn’t trust me; he wanted to make sure of having me out of
the way the whole three days.  So pretty soon he says:

“The man that bought him is named Abram Foster--Abram G. Foster--and he
lives forty mile back here in the country, on the road to Lafayette.”

“All right,” I says, “I can walk it in three days.  And I’ll start this
very afternoon.”

“No you wont, you’ll start _now_; and don’t you lose any time about it,
neither, nor do any gabbling by the way.  Just keep a tight tongue in
your head and move right along, and then you won’t get into trouble with
_us_, d’ye hear?”

That was the order I wanted, and that was the one I played for.  I
wanted to be left free to work my plans.

“So clear out,” he says; “and you can tell Mr. Foster whatever you want
to. Maybe you can get him to believe that Jim _is_ your nigger--some
idiots don’t require documents--leastways I’ve heard there’s such down
South here.  And when you tell him the handbill and the reward’s bogus,
maybe he’ll believe you when you explain to him what the idea was for
getting ‘em out.  Go ‘long now, and tell him anything you want to; but
mind you don’t work your jaw any _between_ here and there.”

So I left, and struck for the back country.  I didn’t look around, but I
kinder felt like he was watching me.  But I knowed I could tire him out
at that.  I went straight out in the country as much as a mile before
I stopped; then I doubled back through the woods towards Phelps’.  I
reckoned I better start in on my plan straight off without fooling
around, because I wanted to stop Jim’s mouth till these fellows could
get away.  I didn’t want no trouble with their kind.  I’d seen all I
wanted to of them, and wanted to get entirely shut of them.




CHAPTER XXXII.

WHEN I got there it was all still and Sunday-like, and hot and sunshiny;
the hands was gone to the fields; and there was them kind of faint
dronings of bugs and flies in the air that makes it seem so lonesome and
like everybody’s dead and gone; and if a breeze fans along and quivers
the leaves it makes you feel mournful, because you feel like it’s
spirits whispering--spirits that’s been dead ever so many years--and you
always think they’re talking about _you_.  As a general thing it makes a
body wish _he_ was dead, too, and done with it all.

Phelps’ was one of these little one-horse cotton plantations, and they
all look alike.  A rail fence round a two-acre yard; a stile made out
of logs sawed off and up-ended in steps, like barrels of a different
length, to climb over the fence with, and for the women to stand on when
they are going to jump on to a horse; some sickly grass-patches in the
big yard, but mostly it was bare and smooth, like an old hat with the
nap rubbed off; big double log-house for the white folks--hewed logs,
with the chinks stopped up with mud or mortar, and these mud-stripes
been whitewashed some time or another; round-log kitchen, with a big
broad, open but roofed passage joining it to the house; log smoke-house
back of the kitchen; three little log nigger-cabins in a row t’other
side the smoke-house; one little hut all by itself away down against
the back fence, and some outbuildings down a piece the other side;
ash-hopper and big kettle to bile soap in by the little hut; bench by
the kitchen door, with bucket of water and a gourd; hound asleep there
in the sun; more hounds asleep round about; about three shade trees away
off in a corner; some currant bushes and gooseberry bushes in one place
by the fence; outside of the fence a garden and a watermelon patch; then
the cotton fields begins, and after the fields the woods.

I went around and clumb over the back stile by the ash-hopper, and
started for the kitchen.  When I got a little ways I heard the dim hum
of a spinning-wheel wailing along up and sinking along down again;
and then I knowed for certain I wished I was dead--for that _is_ the
lonesomest sound in the whole world.

I went right along, not fixing up any particular plan, but just trusting
to Providence to put the right words in my mouth when the time come; for
I’d noticed that Providence always did put the right words in my mouth
if I left it alone.

When I got half-way, first one hound and then another got up and went
for me, and of course I stopped and faced them, and kept still.  And
such another powwow as they made!  In a quarter of a minute I was a kind
of a hub of a wheel, as you may say--spokes made out of dogs--circle of
fifteen of them packed together around me, with their necks and noses
stretched up towards me, a-barking and howling; and more a-coming; you
could see them sailing over fences and around corners from everywheres.

A nigger woman come tearing out of the kitchen with a rolling-pin in her
hand, singing out, “Begone _you_ Tige! you Spot! begone sah!” and she
fetched first one and then another of them a clip and sent them howling,
and then the rest followed; and the next second half of them come back,
wagging their tails around me, and making friends with me.  There ain’t
no harm in a hound, nohow.

And behind the woman comes a little nigger girl and two little nigger
boys without anything on but tow-linen shirts, and they hung on to their
mother’s gown, and peeped out from behind her at me, bashful, the way
they always do.  And here comes the white woman running from the house,
about forty-five or fifty year old, bareheaded, and her spinning-stick
in her hand; and behind her comes her little white children, acting the
same way the little niggers was doing.  She was smiling all over so she
could hardly stand--and says:

“It’s _you_, at last!--_ain’t_ it?”

I out with a “Yes’m” before I thought.

She grabbed me and hugged me tight; and then gripped me by both hands
and shook and shook; and the tears come in her eyes, and run down over;
and she couldn’t seem to hug and shake enough, and kept saying, “You
don’t look as much like your mother as I reckoned you would; but law
sakes, I don’t care for that, I’m so glad to see you!  Dear, dear, it
does seem like I could eat you up!  Children, it’s your cousin Tom!--tell
him howdy.”

But they ducked their heads, and put their fingers in their mouths, and
hid behind her.  So she run on:

“Lize, hurry up and get him a hot breakfast right away--or did you get
your breakfast on the boat?”

I said I had got it on the boat.  So then she started for the house,
leading me by the hand, and the children tagging after.  When we got
there she set me down in a split-bottomed chair, and set herself down on
a little low stool in front of me, holding both of my hands, and says:

“Now I can have a _good_ look at you; and, laws-a-me, I’ve been hungry
for it a many and a many a time, all these long years, and it’s come
at last! We been expecting you a couple of days and more.  What kep’
you?--boat get aground?”

“Yes’m--she--”

“Don’t say yes’m--say Aunt Sally.  Where’d she get aground?”

I didn’t rightly know what to say, because I didn’t know whether the
boat would be coming up the river or down.  But I go a good deal on
instinct; and my instinct said she would be coming up--from down towards
Orleans. That didn’t help me much, though; for I didn’t know the names
of bars down that way.  I see I’d got to invent a bar, or forget the
name of the one we got aground on--or--Now I struck an idea, and fetched
it out:

“It warn’t the grounding--that didn’t keep us back but a little.  We
blowed out a cylinder-head.”

“Good gracious! anybody hurt?”

“No’m.  Killed a nigger.”

“Well, it’s lucky; because sometimes people do get hurt.  Two years ago
last Christmas your uncle Silas was coming up from Newrleans on the old
Lally Rook, and she blowed out a cylinder-head and crippled a man.  And
I think he died afterwards.  He was a Baptist.  Your uncle Silas knowed
a family in Baton Rouge that knowed his people very well.  Yes, I
remember now, he _did_ die.  Mortification set in, and they had to
amputate him. But it didn’t save him.  Yes, it was mortification--that
was it.  He turned blue all over, and died in the hope of a glorious
resurrection. They say he was a sight to look at.  Your uncle’s been up
to the town every day to fetch you. And he’s gone again, not more’n an
hour ago; he’ll be back any minute now. You must a met him on the road,
didn’t you?--oldish man, with a--”

“No, I didn’t see nobody, Aunt Sally.  The boat landed just at daylight,
and I left my baggage on the wharf-boat and went looking around the town
and out a piece in the country, to put in the time and not get here too
soon; and so I come down the back way.”

“Who’d you give the baggage to?”

“Nobody.”

“Why, child, it ‘ll be stole!”

“Not where I hid it I reckon it won’t,” I says.

“How’d you get your breakfast so early on the boat?”

It was kinder thin ice, but I says:

“The captain see me standing around, and told me I better have something
to eat before I went ashore; so he took me in the texas to the officers’
lunch, and give me all I wanted.”

I was getting so uneasy I couldn’t listen good.  I had my mind on the
children all the time; I wanted to get them out to one side and pump
them a little, and find out who I was.  But I couldn’t get no show, Mrs.
Phelps kept it up and run on so.  Pretty soon she made the cold chills
streak all down my back, because she says:

“But here we’re a-running on this way, and you hain’t told me a word
about Sis, nor any of them.  Now I’ll rest my works a little, and you
start up yourn; just tell me _everything_--tell me all about ‘m all every
one of ‘m; and how they are, and what they’re doing, and what they told
you to tell me; and every last thing you can think of.”

Well, I see I was up a stump--and up it good.  Providence had stood by
me this fur all right, but I was hard and tight aground now.  I see it
warn’t a bit of use to try to go ahead--I’d got to throw up my hand.  So
I says to myself, here’s another place where I got to resk the truth.
 I opened my mouth to begin; but she grabbed me and hustled me in behind
the bed, and says:

“Here he comes!  Stick your head down lower--there, that’ll do; you can’t
be seen now.  Don’t you let on you’re here.  I’ll play a joke on him.
Children, don’t you say a word.”

I see I was in a fix now.  But it warn’t no use to worry; there warn’t
nothing to do but just hold still, and try and be ready to stand from
under when the lightning struck.

I had just one little glimpse of the old gentleman when he come in; then
the bed hid him.  Mrs. Phelps she jumps for him, and says:

“Has he come?”

“No,” says her husband.

“Good-_ness_ gracious!” she says, “what in the warld can have become of
him?”

“I can’t imagine,” says the old gentleman; “and I must say it makes me
dreadful uneasy.”

“Uneasy!” she says; “I’m ready to go distracted!  He _must_ a come; and
you’ve missed him along the road.  I _know_ it’s so--something tells me
so.”

“Why, Sally, I _couldn’t_ miss him along the road--_you_ know that.”

“But oh, dear, dear, what _will_ Sis say!  He must a come!  You must a
missed him.  He--”

“Oh, don’t distress me any more’n I’m already distressed.  I don’t know
what in the world to make of it.  I’m at my wit’s end, and I don’t mind
acknowledging ‘t I’m right down scared.  But there’s no hope that he’s
come; for he _couldn’t_ come and me miss him.  Sally, it’s terrible--just
terrible--something’s happened to the boat, sure!”

“Why, Silas!  Look yonder!--up the road!--ain’t that somebody coming?”

He sprung to the window at the head of the bed, and that give Mrs.
Phelps the chance she wanted.  She stooped down quick at the foot of the
bed and give me a pull, and out I come; and when he turned back from the
window there she stood, a-beaming and a-smiling like a house afire, and
I standing pretty meek and sweaty alongside.  The old gentleman stared,
and says:

“Why, who’s that?”

“Who do you reckon ‘t is?”

“I hain’t no idea.  Who _is_ it?”

“It’s _Tom Sawyer!_”

By jings, I most slumped through the floor!  But there warn’t no time to
swap knives; the old man grabbed me by the hand and shook, and kept on
shaking; and all the time how the woman did dance around and laugh and
cry; and then how they both did fire off questions about Sid, and Mary,
and the rest of the tribe.

But if they was joyful, it warn’t nothing to what I was; for it was like
being born again, I was so glad to find out who I was.  Well, they froze
to me for two hours; and at last, when my chin was so tired it couldn’t
hardly go any more, I had told them more about my family--I mean the
Sawyer family--than ever happened to any six Sawyer families.  And I
explained all about how we blowed out a cylinder-head at the mouth of
White River, and it took us three days to fix it.  Which was all right,
and worked first-rate; because _they_ didn’t know but what it would take
three days to fix it.  If I’d a called it a bolthead it would a done
just as well.

Now I was feeling pretty comfortable all down one side, and pretty
uncomfortable all up the other.  Being Tom Sawyer was easy and
comfortable, and it stayed easy and comfortable till by and by I hear a
steamboat coughing along down the river.  Then I says to myself, s’pose
Tom Sawyer comes down on that boat?  And s’pose he steps in here any
minute, and sings out my name before I can throw him a wink to keep
quiet?

Well, I couldn’t _have_ it that way; it wouldn’t do at all.  I must go
up the road and waylay him.  So I told the folks I reckoned I would go
up to the town and fetch down my baggage.  The old gentleman was for
going along with me, but I said no, I could drive the horse myself, and
I druther he wouldn’t take no trouble about me.




CHAPTER XXXIII.

SO I started for town in the wagon, and when I was half-way I see a
wagon coming, and sure enough it was Tom Sawyer, and I stopped and
waited till he come along.  I says “Hold on!” and it stopped alongside,
and his mouth opened up like a trunk, and stayed so; and he swallowed
two or three times like a person that’s got a dry throat, and then says:

“I hain’t ever done you no harm.  You know that.  So, then, what you
want to come back and ha’nt _me_ for?”

I says:

“I hain’t come back--I hain’t been _gone_.”

When he heard my voice it righted him up some, but he warn’t quite
satisfied yet.  He says:

“Don’t you play nothing on me, because I wouldn’t on you.  Honest injun
now, you ain’t a ghost?”

“Honest injun, I ain’t,” I says.

“Well--I--I--well, that ought to settle it, of course; but I can’t somehow
seem to understand it no way.  Looky here, warn’t you ever murdered _at
all?_”

“No.  I warn’t ever murdered at all--I played it on them.  You come in
here and feel of me if you don’t believe me.”

So he done it; and it satisfied him; and he was that glad to see me
again he didn’t know what to do.  And he wanted to know all about it
right off, because it was a grand adventure, and mysterious, and so it
hit him where he lived.  But I said, leave it alone till by and by; and
told his driver to wait, and we drove off a little piece, and I told
him the kind of a fix I was in, and what did he reckon we better do?  He
said, let him alone a minute, and don’t disturb him.  So he thought and
thought, and pretty soon he says:

“It’s all right; I’ve got it.  Take my trunk in your wagon, and let on
it’s your’n; and you turn back and fool along slow, so as to get to the
house about the time you ought to; and I’ll go towards town a piece, and
take a fresh start, and get there a quarter or a half an hour after you;
and you needn’t let on to know me at first.”

I says:

“All right; but wait a minute.  There’s one more thing--a thing that
_nobody_ don’t know but me.  And that is, there’s a nigger here that
I’m a-trying to steal out of slavery, and his name is _Jim_--old Miss
Watson’s Jim.”

He says:

“What!  Why, Jim is--”

He stopped and went to studying.  I says:

“I know what you’ll say.  You’ll say it’s dirty, low-down business; but
what if it is?  I’m low down; and I’m a-going to steal him, and I want
you keep mum and not let on.  Will you?”

His eye lit up, and he says:

“I’ll _help_ you steal him!”

Well, I let go all holts then, like I was shot.  It was the most
astonishing speech I ever heard--and I’m bound to say Tom Sawyer fell
considerable in my estimation.  Only I couldn’t believe it.  Tom Sawyer
a _nigger-stealer!_

“Oh, shucks!”  I says; “you’re joking.”

“I ain’t joking, either.”

“Well, then,” I says, “joking or no joking, if you hear anything said
about a runaway nigger, don’t forget to remember that _you_ don’t know
nothing about him, and I don’t know nothing about him.”

Then we took the trunk and put it in my wagon, and he drove off his
way and I drove mine.  But of course I forgot all about driving slow on
accounts of being glad and full of thinking; so I got home a heap too
quick for that length of a trip.  The old gentleman was at the door, and
he says:

“Why, this is wonderful!  Whoever would a thought it was in that mare
to do it?  I wish we’d a timed her.  And she hain’t sweated a hair--not
a hair. It’s wonderful.  Why, I wouldn’t take a hundred dollars for that
horse now--I wouldn’t, honest; and yet I’d a sold her for fifteen before,
and thought ‘twas all she was worth.”

That’s all he said.  He was the innocentest, best old soul I ever see.
But it warn’t surprising; because he warn’t only just a farmer, he was
a preacher, too, and had a little one-horse log church down back of the
plantation, which he built it himself at his own expense, for a church
and schoolhouse, and never charged nothing for his preaching, and it was
worth it, too.  There was plenty other farmer-preachers like that, and
done the same way, down South.

In about half an hour Tom’s wagon drove up to the front stile, and Aunt
Sally she see it through the window, because it was only about fifty
yards, and says:

“Why, there’s somebody come!  I wonder who ‘tis?  Why, I do believe it’s
a stranger.  Jimmy” (that’s one of the children) “run and tell Lize to
put on another plate for dinner.”

Everybody made a rush for the front door, because, of course, a stranger
don’t come _every_ year, and so he lays over the yaller-fever, for
interest, when he does come.  Tom was over the stile and starting for
the house; the wagon was spinning up the road for the village, and we
was all bunched in the front door.  Tom had his store clothes on, and an
audience--and that was always nuts for Tom Sawyer.  In them circumstances
it warn’t no trouble to him to throw in an amount of style that was
suitable.  He warn’t a boy to meeky along up that yard like a sheep; no,
he come ca’m and important, like the ram.  When he got a-front of us he
lifts his hat ever so gracious and dainty, like it was the lid of a box
that had butterflies asleep in it and he didn’t want to disturb them,
and says:

“Mr. Archibald Nichols, I presume?”

“No, my boy,” says the old gentleman, “I’m sorry to say ‘t your driver
has deceived you; Nichols’s place is down a matter of three mile more.
Come in, come in.”

Tom he took a look back over his shoulder, and says, “Too late--he’s out
of sight.”

“Yes, he’s gone, my son, and you must come in and eat your dinner with
us; and then we’ll hitch up and take you down to Nichols’s.”

“Oh, I _can’t_ make you so much trouble; I couldn’t think of it.  I’ll
walk--I don’t mind the distance.”
