Then, the night you’re ready, fetch the leg a kick, down she goes; slip
off your chain, and there you are.  Nothing to do but hitch your
rope ladder to the battlements, shin down it, break your leg in the
moat--because a rope ladder is nineteen foot too short, you know--and
there’s your horses and your trusty vassles, and they scoop you up and
fling you across a saddle, and away you go to your native Langudoc, or
Navarre, or wherever it is. It’s gaudy, Huck.  I wish there was a moat
to this cabin. If we get time, the night of the escape, we’ll dig one.”

I says:

“What do we want of a moat when we’re going to snake him out from under
the cabin?”

But he never heard me.  He had forgot me and everything else.  He had
his chin in his hand, thinking.  Pretty soon he sighs and shakes his
head; then sighs again, and says:

“No, it wouldn’t do--there ain’t necessity enough for it.”

“For what?”  I says.

“Why, to saw Jim’s leg off,” he says.

“Good land!”  I says; “why, there ain’t _no_ necessity for it.  And what
would you want to saw his leg off for, anyway?”

“Well, some of the best authorities has done it.  They couldn’t get the
chain off, so they just cut their hand off and shoved.  And a leg would
be better still.  But we got to let that go.  There ain’t necessity
enough in this case; and, besides, Jim’s a nigger, and wouldn’t
understand the reasons for it, and how it’s the custom in Europe; so
we’ll let it go.  But there’s one thing--he can have a rope ladder; we
can tear up our sheets and make him a rope ladder easy enough.  And we
can send it to him in a pie; it’s mostly done that way.  And I’ve et
worse pies.”

“Why, Tom Sawyer, how you talk,” I says; “Jim ain’t got no use for a
rope ladder.”

“He _has_ got use for it.  How _you_ talk, you better say; you don’t
know nothing about it.  He’s _got_ to have a rope ladder; they all do.”

“What in the nation can he _do_ with it?”

“_Do_ with it?  He can hide it in his bed, can’t he?”  That’s what they
all do; and _he’s_ got to, too.  Huck, you don’t ever seem to want to do
anything that’s regular; you want to be starting something fresh all the
time. S’pose he _don’t_ do nothing with it? ain’t it there in his bed,
for a clew, after he’s gone? and don’t you reckon they’ll want clews?
 Of course they will.  And you wouldn’t leave them any?  That would be a
_pretty_ howdy-do, _wouldn’t_ it!  I never heard of such a thing.”

“Well,” I says, “if it’s in the regulations, and he’s got to have
it, all right, let him have it; because I don’t wish to go back on no
regulations; but there’s one thing, Tom Sawyer--if we go to tearing up
our sheets to make Jim a rope ladder, we’re going to get into trouble
with Aunt Sally, just as sure as you’re born.  Now, the way I look at
it, a hickry-bark ladder don’t cost nothing, and don’t waste nothing,
and is just as good to load up a pie with, and hide in a straw tick,
as any rag ladder you can start; and as for Jim, he ain’t had no
experience, and so he don’t care what kind of a--”

“Oh, shucks, Huck Finn, if I was as ignorant as you I’d keep
still--that’s what I’D do.  Who ever heard of a state prisoner escaping
by a hickry-bark ladder?  Why, it’s perfectly ridiculous.”

“Well, all right, Tom, fix it your own way; but if you’ll take my
advice, you’ll let me borrow a sheet off of the clothesline.”

He said that would do.  And that gave him another idea, and he says:

“Borrow a shirt, too.”

“What do we want of a shirt, Tom?”

“Want it for Jim to keep a journal on.”

“Journal your granny--_Jim_ can’t write.”

“S’pose he _can’t_ write--he can make marks on the shirt, can’t he, if
we make him a pen out of an old pewter spoon or a piece of an old iron
barrel-hoop?”

“Why, Tom, we can pull a feather out of a goose and make him a better
one; and quicker, too.”

“_Prisoners_ don’t have geese running around the donjon-keep to pull
pens out of, you muggins.  They _always_ make their pens out of the
hardest, toughest, troublesomest piece of old brass candlestick or
something like that they can get their hands on; and it takes them weeks
and weeks and months and months to file it out, too, because they’ve got
to do it by rubbing it on the wall.  _They_ wouldn’t use a goose-quill
if they had it. It ain’t regular.”

“Well, then, what’ll we make him the ink out of?”

“Many makes it out of iron-rust and tears; but that’s the common sort
and women; the best authorities uses their own blood.  Jim can do that;
and when he wants to send any little common ordinary mysterious message
to let the world know where he’s captivated, he can write it on the
bottom of a tin plate with a fork and throw it out of the window.  The
Iron Mask always done that, and it’s a blame’ good way, too.”

“Jim ain’t got no tin plates.  They feed him in a pan.”

“That ain’t nothing; we can get him some.”

“Can’t nobody _read_ his plates.”

“That ain’t got anything to _do_ with it, Huck Finn.  All _he’s_ got to
do is to write on the plate and throw it out.  You don’t _have_ to be
able to read it. Why, half the time you can’t read anything a prisoner
writes on a tin plate, or anywhere else.”

“Well, then, what’s the sense in wasting the plates?”

“Why, blame it all, it ain’t the _prisoner’s_ plates.”

“But it’s _somebody’s_ plates, ain’t it?”

“Well, spos’n it is?  What does the _prisoner_ care whose--”

He broke off there, because we heard the breakfast-horn blowing.  So we
cleared out for the house.

Along during the morning I borrowed a sheet and a white shirt off of the
clothes-line; and I found an old sack and put them in it, and we went
down and got the fox-fire, and put that in too.  I called it borrowing,
because that was what pap always called it; but Tom said it warn’t
borrowing, it was stealing.  He said we was representing prisoners; and
prisoners don’t care how they get a thing so they get it, and nobody
don’t blame them for it, either.  It ain’t no crime in a prisoner to
steal the thing he needs to get away with, Tom said; it’s his right; and
so, as long as we was representing a prisoner, we had a perfect right to
steal anything on this place we had the least use for to get ourselves
out of prison with.  He said if we warn’t prisoners it would be a very
different thing, and nobody but a mean, ornery person would steal when
he warn’t a prisoner.  So we allowed we would steal everything there was
that come handy.  And yet he made a mighty fuss, one day, after that,
when I stole a watermelon out of the nigger-patch and eat it; and he
made me go and give the niggers a dime without telling them what it
was for. Tom said that what he meant was, we could steal anything we
_needed_. Well, I says, I needed the watermelon.  But he said I didn’t
need it to get out of prison with; there’s where the difference was.
 He said if I’d a wanted it to hide a knife in, and smuggle it to Jim
to kill the seneskal with, it would a been all right.  So I let it go at
that, though I couldn’t see no advantage in my representing a prisoner
if I got to set down and chaw over a lot of gold-leaf distinctions like
that every time I see a chance to hog a watermelon.

Well, as I was saying, we waited that morning till everybody was settled
down to business, and nobody in sight around the yard; then Tom he
carried the sack into the lean-to whilst I stood off a piece to keep
watch.  By and by he come out, and we went and set down on the woodpile
to talk.  He says:

“Everything’s all right now except tools; and that’s easy fixed.”

“Tools?”  I says.

“Yes.”

“Tools for what?”

“Why, to dig with.  We ain’t a-going to _gnaw_ him out, are we?”

“Ain’t them old crippled picks and things in there good enough to dig a
nigger out with?”  I says.

He turns on me, looking pitying enough to make a body cry, and says:

“Huck Finn, did you _ever_ hear of a prisoner having picks and shovels,
and all the modern conveniences in his wardrobe to dig himself out with?
 Now I want to ask you--if you got any reasonableness in you at all--what
kind of a show would _that_ give him to be a hero?  Why, they might as
well lend him the key and done with it.  Picks and shovels--why, they
wouldn’t furnish ‘em to a king.”

“Well, then,” I says, “if we don’t want the picks and shovels, what do
we want?”

“A couple of case-knives.”

“To dig the foundations out from under that cabin with?”

“Yes.”

“Confound it, it’s foolish, Tom.”

“It don’t make no difference how foolish it is, it’s the _right_ way--and
it’s the regular way.  And there ain’t no _other_ way, that ever I heard
of, and I’ve read all the books that gives any information about these
things. They always dig out with a case-knife--and not through dirt, mind
you; generly it’s through solid rock.  And it takes them weeks and weeks
and weeks, and for ever and ever.  Why, look at one of them prisoners in
the bottom dungeon of the Castle Deef, in the harbor of Marseilles, that
dug himself out that way; how long was _he_ at it, you reckon?”

“I don’t know.”

“Well, guess.”

“I don’t know.  A month and a half.”

“_Thirty-seven year_--and he come out in China.  _That’s_ the kind.  I
wish the bottom of _this_ fortress was solid rock.”

“_Jim_ don’t know nobody in China.”

“What’s _that_ got to do with it?  Neither did that other fellow.  But
you’re always a-wandering off on a side issue.  Why can’t you stick to
the main point?”

“All right--I don’t care where he comes out, so he _comes_ out; and Jim
don’t, either, I reckon.  But there’s one thing, anyway--Jim’s too old to
be dug out with a case-knife.  He won’t last.”

“Yes he will _last_, too.  You don’t reckon it’s going to take
thirty-seven years to dig out through a _dirt_ foundation, do you?”

“How long will it take, Tom?”

“Well, we can’t resk being as long as we ought to, because it mayn’t
take very long for Uncle Silas to hear from down there by New Orleans.
 He’ll hear Jim ain’t from there.  Then his next move will be to
advertise Jim, or something like that.  So we can’t resk being as long
digging him out as we ought to.  By rights I reckon we ought to be
a couple of years; but we can’t.  Things being so uncertain, what I
recommend is this:  that we really dig right in, as quick as we can;
and after that, we can _let on_, to ourselves, that we was at it
thirty-seven years.  Then we can snatch him out and rush him away the
first time there’s an alarm.  Yes, I reckon that ‘ll be the best way.”

“Now, there’s _sense_ in that,” I says.  “Letting on don’t cost nothing;
letting on ain’t no trouble; and if it’s any object, I don’t mind
letting on we was at it a hundred and fifty year.  It wouldn’t strain
me none, after I got my hand in.  So I’ll mosey along now, and smouch a
couple of case-knives.”

“Smouch three,” he says; “we want one to make a saw out of.”

“Tom, if it ain’t unregular and irreligious to sejest it,” I says,
“there’s an old rusty saw-blade around yonder sticking under the
weather-boarding behind the smoke-house.”

He looked kind of weary and discouraged-like, and says:

“It ain’t no use to try to learn you nothing, Huck.  Run along and
smouch the knives--three of them.”  So I done it.




CHAPTER XXXVI.

AS soon as we reckoned everybody was asleep that night we went down the
lightning-rod, and shut ourselves up in the lean-to, and got out our
pile of fox-fire, and went to work.  We cleared everything out of the
way, about four or five foot along the middle of the bottom log.  Tom
said he was right behind Jim’s bed now, and we’d dig in under it, and
when we got through there couldn’t nobody in the cabin ever know there
was any hole there, because Jim’s counter-pin hung down most to the
ground, and you’d have to raise it up and look under to see the hole.
 So we dug and dug with the case-knives till most midnight; and then
we was dog-tired, and our hands was blistered, and yet you couldn’t see
we’d done anything hardly.  At last I says:

“This ain’t no thirty-seven year job; this is a thirty-eight year job,
Tom Sawyer.”

He never said nothing.  But he sighed, and pretty soon he stopped
digging, and then for a good little while I knowed that he was thinking.
Then he says:

“It ain’t no use, Huck, it ain’t a-going to work.  If we was prisoners
it would, because then we’d have as many years as we wanted, and no
hurry; and we wouldn’t get but a few minutes to dig, every day, while
they was changing watches, and so our hands wouldn’t get blistered, and
we could keep it up right along, year in and year out, and do it right,
and the way it ought to be done.  But _we_ can’t fool along; we got to
rush; we ain’t got no time to spare.  If we was to put in another
night this way we’d have to knock off for a week to let our hands get
well--couldn’t touch a case-knife with them sooner.”

“Well, then, what we going to do, Tom?”

“I’ll tell you.  It ain’t right, and it ain’t moral, and I wouldn’t like
it to get out; but there ain’t only just the one way:  we got to dig him
out with the picks, and _let on_ it’s case-knives.”

“_Now_ you’re _talking_!”  I says; “your head gets leveler and leveler
all the time, Tom Sawyer,” I says.  “Picks is the thing, moral or no
moral; and as for me, I don’t care shucks for the morality of it, nohow.
 When I start in to steal a nigger, or a watermelon, or a Sunday-school
book, I ain’t no ways particular how it’s done so it’s done.  What I
want is my nigger; or what I want is my watermelon; or what I want is my
Sunday-school book; and if a pick’s the handiest thing, that’s the thing
I’m a-going to dig that nigger or that watermelon or that Sunday-school
book out with; and I don’t give a dead rat what the authorities thinks
about it nuther.”

“Well,” he says, “there’s excuse for picks and letting-on in a case like
this; if it warn’t so, I wouldn’t approve of it, nor I wouldn’t stand by
and see the rules broke--because right is right, and wrong is wrong,
and a body ain’t got no business doing wrong when he ain’t ignorant and
knows better.  It might answer for _you_ to dig Jim out with a pick,
_without_ any letting on, because you don’t know no better; but it
wouldn’t for me, because I do know better.  Gimme a case-knife.”

He had his own by him, but I handed him mine.  He flung it down, and
says:

“Gimme a _case-knife_.”

I didn’t know just what to do--but then I thought.  I scratched around
amongst the old tools, and got a pickaxe and give it to him, and he took
it and went to work, and never said a word.

He was always just that particular.  Full of principle.

So then I got a shovel, and then we picked and shoveled, turn about,
and made the fur fly.  We stuck to it about a half an hour, which was as
long as we could stand up; but we had a good deal of a hole to show for
it. When I got up stairs I looked out at the window and see Tom doing
his level best with the lightning-rod, but he couldn’t come it, his
hands was so sore.  At last he says:

“It ain’t no use, it can’t be done.  What you reckon I better do?  Can’t
you think of no way?”

“Yes,” I says, “but I reckon it ain’t regular.  Come up the stairs, and
let on it’s a lightning-rod.”

So he done it.

Next day Tom stole a pewter spoon and a brass candlestick in the house,
for to make some pens for Jim out of, and six tallow candles; and I
hung around the nigger cabins and laid for a chance, and stole three tin
plates.  Tom says it wasn’t enough; but I said nobody wouldn’t ever see
the plates that Jim throwed out, because they’d fall in the dog-fennel
and jimpson weeds under the window-hole--then we could tote them back and
he could use them over again.  So Tom was satisfied.  Then he says:

“Now, the thing to study out is, how to get the things to Jim.”

“Take them in through the hole,” I says, “when we get it done.”

He only just looked scornful, and said something about nobody ever heard
of such an idiotic idea, and then he went to studying.  By and by he
said he had ciphered out two or three ways, but there warn’t no need to
decide on any of them yet.  Said we’d got to post Jim first.

That night we went down the lightning-rod a little after ten, and took
one of the candles along, and listened under the window-hole, and heard
Jim snoring; so we pitched it in, and it didn’t wake him.  Then we
whirled in with the pick and shovel, and in about two hours and a half
the job was done.  We crept in under Jim’s bed and into the cabin, and
pawed around and found the candle and lit it, and stood over Jim awhile,
and found him looking hearty and healthy, and then we woke him up gentle
and gradual.  He was so glad to see us he most cried; and called us
honey, and all the pet names he could think of; and was for having us
hunt up a cold-chisel to cut the chain off of his leg with right away,
and clearing out without losing any time.  But Tom he showed him how
unregular it would be, and set down and told him all about our plans,
and how we could alter them in a minute any time there was an alarm; and
not to be the least afraid, because we would see he got away, _sure_.
 So Jim he said it was all right, and we set there and talked over old
times awhile, and then Tom asked a lot of questions, and when Jim told
him Uncle Silas come in every day or two to pray with him, and Aunt
Sally come in to see if he was comfortable and had plenty to eat, and
both of them was kind as they could be, Tom says:

“_Now_ I know how to fix it.  We’ll send you some things by them.”

I said, “Don’t do nothing of the kind; it’s one of the most jackass
ideas I ever struck;” but he never paid no attention to me; went right
on.  It was his way when he’d got his plans set.

So he told Jim how we’d have to smuggle in the rope-ladder pie and other
large things by Nat, the nigger that fed him, and he must be on the
lookout, and not be surprised, and not let Nat see him open them; and
we would put small things in uncle’s coat-pockets and he must steal them
out; and we would tie things to aunt’s apron-strings or put them in her
apron-pocket, if we got a chance; and told him what they would be and
what they was for.  And told him how to keep a journal on the shirt with
his blood, and all that. He told him everything.  Jim he couldn’t see
no sense in the most of it, but he allowed we was white folks and knowed
better than him; so he was satisfied, and said he would do it all just
as Tom said.

Jim had plenty corn-cob pipes and tobacco; so we had a right down good
sociable time; then we crawled out through the hole, and so home to
bed, with hands that looked like they’d been chawed.  Tom was in high
spirits. He said it was the best fun he ever had in his life, and the
most intellectural; and said if he only could see his way to it we would
keep it up all the rest of our lives and leave Jim to our children to
get out; for he believed Jim would come to like it better and better the
more he got used to it.  He said that in that way it could be strung out
to as much as eighty year, and would be the best time on record.  And he
said it would make us all celebrated that had a hand in it.

In the morning we went out to the woodpile and chopped up the brass
candlestick into handy sizes, and Tom put them and the pewter spoon in
his pocket.  Then we went to the nigger cabins, and while I got Nat’s
notice off, Tom shoved a piece of candlestick into the middle of a
corn-pone that was in Jim’s pan, and we went along with Nat to see how
it would work, and it just worked noble; when Jim bit into it it most
mashed all his teeth out; and there warn’t ever anything could a worked
better. Tom said so himself. Jim he never let on but what it was only
just a piece of rock or something like that that’s always getting into
bread, you know; but after that he never bit into nothing but what he
jabbed his fork into it in three or four places first.

And whilst we was a-standing there in the dimmish light, here comes a
couple of the hounds bulging in from under Jim’s bed; and they kept on
piling in till there was eleven of them, and there warn’t hardly room
in there to get your breath.  By jings, we forgot to fasten that lean-to
door!  The nigger Nat he only just hollered “Witches” once, and keeled
over on to the floor amongst the dogs, and begun to groan like he was
dying.  Tom jerked the door open and flung out a slab of Jim’s meat,
and the dogs went for it, and in two seconds he was out himself and back
again and shut the door, and I knowed he’d fixed the other door too.
Then he went to work on the nigger, coaxing him and petting him, and
asking him if he’d been imagining he saw something again.  He raised up,
and blinked his eyes around, and says:

“Mars Sid, you’ll say I’s a fool, but if I didn’t b’lieve I see most a
million dogs, er devils, er some’n, I wisht I may die right heah in dese
tracks.  I did, mos’ sholy.  Mars Sid, I _felt_ um--I _felt_ um, sah; dey
was all over me.  Dad fetch it, I jis’ wisht I could git my han’s on one
er dem witches jis’ wunst--on’y jis’ wunst--it’s all I’d ast.  But mos’ly
I wisht dey’d lemme ‘lone, I does.”

Tom says:

“Well, I tell you what I think.  What makes them come here just at this
runaway nigger’s breakfast-time?  It’s because they’re hungry; that’s
the reason.  You make them a witch pie; that’s the thing for _you_ to
do.”

“But my lan’, Mars Sid, how’s I gwyne to make ‘m a witch pie?  I doan’
know how to make it.  I hain’t ever hearn er sich a thing b’fo’.”

“Well, then, I’ll have to make it myself.”

“Will you do it, honey?--will you?  I’ll wusshup de groun’ und’ yo’ foot,
I will!”

“All right, I’ll do it, seeing it’s you, and you’ve been good to us and
showed us the runaway nigger.  But you got to be mighty careful.  When
we come around, you turn your back; and then whatever we’ve put in the
pan, don’t you let on you see it at all.  And don’t you look when Jim
unloads the pan--something might happen, I don’t know what.  And above
all, don’t you _handle_ the witch-things.”

“_Hannel ‘M_, Mars Sid?  What _is_ you a-talkin’ ‘bout?  I wouldn’
lay de weight er my finger on um, not f’r ten hund’d thous’n billion
dollars, I wouldn’t.”




CHAPTER XXXVII.

THAT was all fixed.  So then we went away and went to the rubbage-pile
in the back yard, where they keep the old boots, and rags, and pieces
of bottles, and wore-out tin things, and all such truck, and scratched
around and found an old tin washpan, and stopped up the holes as well as
we could, to bake the pie in, and took it down cellar and stole it full
of flour and started for breakfast, and found a couple of shingle-nails
that Tom said would be handy for a prisoner to scrabble his name and
sorrows on the dungeon walls with, and dropped one of them in Aunt
Sally’s apron-pocket which was hanging on a chair, and t’other we stuck
in the band of Uncle Silas’s hat, which was on the bureau, because we
heard the children say their pa and ma was going to the runaway nigger’s
house this morning, and then went to breakfast, and Tom dropped the
pewter spoon in Uncle Silas’s coat-pocket, and Aunt Sally wasn’t come
yet, so we had to wait a little while.

And when she come she was hot and red and cross, and couldn’t hardly
wait for the blessing; and then she went to sluicing out coffee with one
hand and cracking the handiest child’s head with her thimble with the
other, and says:

“I’ve hunted high and I’ve hunted low, and it does beat all what _has_
become of your other shirt.”

My heart fell down amongst my lungs and livers and things, and a hard
piece of corn-crust started down my throat after it and got met on the
road with a cough, and was shot across the table, and took one of the
children in the eye and curled him up like a fishing-worm, and let a cry
out of him the size of a warwhoop, and Tom he turned kinder blue around
the gills, and it all amounted to a considerable state of things for
